---
title: "Comparison of Group-Contribution and Machine Learning-based Property Prediction Models with Uncertainty Quantification"
collection: talks
type: "Poster"
permalink: /talks/2021-talk-3
venue: "ESCAPE-31"
date: 2021-06-01
location: "Istanbul, Turkey"
---



Abstract:

Thermophysical properties such as critical constants and enthalpic properties play a vital role in many chemical engineering applications, e.g., phase equilibria calculations, process simulation, risk assessment, computer-aided molecular design [1,2], among others. The ability to predict these properties in a fast yet computationally efficient way is of paramount importance for many applications, especially in the absence of experimental data. Traditionally, quantitative structure-property relationships (QSPRs) type models are employed to mathematically predict such properties using machine-readable molecular structure information of the compounds. Among them, Group contribution (GC) models use pre-defined molecular subsections as the source of structural information. A widely-cited example of such methods was developed by  Marrero & Gani [3]. Furthermore, the importance of quantifying the uncertainties in property prediction models is underlined in several studies. Frutiger et al. [4] assessed the impact of prediction uncertainties of critical constants on a thermodynamic cycle while Hajipour et al. [5] illustrated the impact of property uncertainties on various phase equilibria calculations. 


Recently, efforts have also been invested in applying emerging machine learning techniques as the new predictive tool [6]. Among them, deep neural networks (DNN) have drawn the utmost attention in property prediction due to their ability to extract hidden features in large datasets, which allows such models to compare, if not outperform, the QSPR models [7]. As such, they found wide uses in predicting the perceived odor of molecules [6], critical properties [8], environmental properties [9], and thermophysical properties of halogenated olefins [10]. Common for all these models is the lack of information regarding the uncertainty surrounding the produced predictions, which hinders the broader use of such models, especially in applications involving engineering decision-making. 


In this work, we develop and compare property prediction models with uncertainty quantification based on three different modeling approaches: a classical GC-based non-linear regression, a machine learning-based Gaussian process regression, and a deep learning-based neural network (DNN) applied to two property datasets—lower flammability limit and normal melting point—obtained from AIChE DIPPR® database. Model prediction uncertainties are quantified using a covariance-based approach for GC-based models, whereas for the deep learning-based models, we use the recently developed Tensorflow probability framework [11], which provides probabilistic layers to address aleatoric and epistemic types of uncertainties. Results obtained show the quantified confidence intervals that encompass the property data with the predictions, considerably increasing the trust in the use of such models. Also shown is the comparison of uncertainties obtained from three different modeling approaches. 



 
References	

[1]	J. Frutiger, C. Marcarie, J. Abildskov, G. Sin, Group-contribution based property estimation and uncertainty analysis for flammability-related properties, J. Hazard. Mater. 318 (2016) 783–793. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2016.06.018.

[2]	A.S. Hukkerikar, B. Sarup, A. Ten Kate, J. Abildskov, G. Sin, R. Gani, Group-contribution + (GC +) based estimation of properties of pure components: Improved property estimation and uncertainty analysis, Fluid Phase Equilib. 321 (2012) 25–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fluid.2012.02.010.

[3]	J. Marrero, R. Gani, Group-contribution based estimation of pure component properties, Fluid Phase Equilib. 183–184 (2001) 183–208. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-3812(01)00431-9.

[4]	J. Frutiger, I. Bell, J.P. O’Connell, K. Kroenlein, J. Abildskov, G. Sin, Uncertainty assessment of equations of state with application to an organic Rankine cycle†, Mol. Phys. 115 (2017) 1225–1244. https://doi.org/10.1080/00268976.2016.1275856.

[5]	S. Hajipour, M.A. Satyro, Uncertainty analysis applied to thermodynamic models and process design - 1. Pure components, Fluid Phase Equilib. 307 (2011) 78–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fluid.2011.05.014.

[6]	L. Zhang, H. Mao, L. Liu, J. Du, R. Gani, A machine learning based computer-aided molecular design/screening methodology for fragrance molecules, Comput. Chem. Eng. 115 (2018) 295–308. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.2018.04.018.

[7]	G.B. Goh, C. Siegel, A. Vishnu, N.O. Hodas, N. Baker, Chemception: A Deep Neural Network with Minimal Chemistry Knowledge Matches the Performance of Expert-developed QSAR/QSPR Models, (2017) 1–38. http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.06689.

[8]	Y. Su, Z. Wang, S. Jin, W. Shen, J. Ren, M.R. Eden, An architecture of deep learning in QSPR modeling for the prediction of critical properties using molecular signatures, AIChE J. 65 (2019) 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.16678.

[9]	Z. Wang, Y. Su, W. Shen, S. Jin, J.H. Clark, J. Ren, X. Zhang, Predictive deep learning models for environmental properties: The direct calculation of octanol-water partition coefficients from molecular graphs, Green Chem. 21 (2019) 4555–4565. https://doi.org/10.1039/c9gc01968e.

[10]	M.E. Mondejar, S. Cignitti, J. Abildskov, J.M. Woodley, F. Haglind, Prediction of properties of new halogenated olefins using two group contribution approaches, Fluid Phase Equilib. 433 (2017) 79–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fluid.2016.10.020.

[11]	J. V. Dillon, I. Langmore, D. Tran, E. Brevdo, S. Vasudevan, D. Moore, B. Patton, A. Alemi, M. Hoffman, R.A. Saurous, TensorFlow Distributions, (2017). http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.10604.

