---
title: "Benchmarking Uncertainty Quantification Methods for Property Prediction Models: Application to Group-Contribution Models"
collection: talks
type: "Keynote lecture"
permalink: /talks/2021-talk-1
venue: "the 13th European Congress of Chemical Engineering (ECCE)"
date: 2021-09-01
location: "Berlin, Germany"
---


Abstract

In the absence of experimental data, predictive models for thermophysical properties of various chemicals become an essential tool in many engineering disciplines (Hukkerikar et al., 2012). The critical temperature and pressure are used in the equation of states such as the Peng-Robinson equation in order to perform PVT calculation, the lower and upper flammability limits are used for process safety assessment, while the enthalpy of formation and Gibbs free energy can be used in reaction engineering to determine the reaction equilibrium constants (Mondejar et al., 2019). An example of such predictive models is the group-contribution-based models (Hukkerikar et al., 2012)(Marrero and Gani, 2001). This quantitative structure-property relation type of model uses the number of occurrences of a series of predefined molecular groups as the molecular descriptor (Marrero and Gani, 2001). The molecular descriptor is then related to the target property through a mathematical model derived from the trend of the homologous series (Hukkerikar et al., 2012). 

While many property prediction models have been developed based on various molecular descriptors and numerous mathematical formulations, few have dealt with quantifying the uncertainty in the models' predictive power. This could potentially hinder the broader use of such models, especially in applications involving engineering decision-making. Previous work on uncertainty analysis of group-contribution (GC) property models has employed the linear propagation of the error using the parameter covariance matrix and the bootstrap (Frutiger et al., 2016; Hukkerikar et al., 2012). 

In this work, we develop a methodology to perform the uncertainty quantification using importance sampling for GC-based models for selected target properties. The obtained results are then compared to the output uncertainty evaluated by linear error propagation and the bootstrap method as well as the uncertainty information related to the experimental measurements. Such comparative study is necessary to provide insight into the uncertainty of model outputs and promote their use in applications involving engineering decision making.

References

Frutiger, J., Marcarie, C., Abildskov, J., Sin, G., 2016. A Comprehensive Methodology for Development, Parameter Estimation, and Uncertainty Analysis of Group Contribution Based Property Models-An Application to the Heat of Combustion. J. Chem. Eng. Data 61, 602–613. 

Hukkerikar, A.S., Sarup, B., Ten Kate, A., Abildskov, J., Sin, G., Gani, R., 2012. Group-contribution + (GC +) based estimation of properties of pure components: Improved property estimation and uncertainty analysis. Fluid Phase Equilib. 321, 25–43.

Marrero, J., Gani, R., 2001. Group-contribution based estimation of pure component properties. Fluid Phase Equilib. 183–184, 183–208. 

Mondejar, M.E., Frutiger, J., Cignitti, S., Abildskov, J., Sin, G., Woodley, J.M., Haglind, F., 2019. Uncertainty in the prediction of the thermophysical behavior of new halogenated working fluids. Fluid Phase Equilib. 485, 220–233. 


